docs/Stage IV — Inference/deam-indexing-and-knn.md, before:

# DEAM Indexing and kNN

- [ ] Segment DEAM into 10s windows with 50% overlap (2 Hz annotations)
- [ ] Build KD-Tree over segment means in V-A space
- [ ] Persist `segments_metadata` and KD-Tree for reuse
- [ ] Validate index quality on sample queries

Extracted from [project_overview.md](file:///Users/desmondchoy/Projects/emo-rec/docs/project_overview.md).

## Segmentation

- Window size: 10 seconds
- Overlap: 50% (step = window × 0.5)
- Labels: mean valence and arousal per window (DEAM dynamic annotations in [-10, 10])

## Indexing

- Build KD-Tree on `[[valence, arousal], ...]` for fast k-NN.
- Store alongside a dataframe with: `song_id`, `start_time`, `end_time`, `valence`, `arousal`.

## Reference implementation

```python
class DEAMSegmentProcessor:
    def __init__(self, deam_path, window_size=10, overlap=0.5):
        self.deam_path = deam_path
        self.window_size = window_size
        self.overlap = overlap
        self.sampling_rate = 2  # Hz

    def process_dataset(self):
        annotations = pd.read_csv(f"{self.deam_path}/annotations_dynamic.csv")
        segments = []
        for song_id, song_data in annotations.groupby('song_id'):
            segments.extend(self._extract_segments(song_id, song_data))
        segments_df = pd.DataFrame(segments)
        self.kd_tree = KDTree(segments_df[['valence', 'arousal']].values)
        self.segments_metadata = segments_df
        return segments_df
```

Commit message:

docs: use DEAM static [1–9] for POC; update mappings chore: rename agent guide file to AGENTS.md
Adopt DEAM static annotations [1–9] (per 45s excerpt) as the
reference scale for the academic POC. Keep dynamic [-10,10]
documented for future work. Replace FE→DEAM formulas and code
snippets to map FindingEmo → DEAM static.

- Clarify dual scales in DEAM (dynamic [-10,10], static [1,9])
- State POC choice: static [1,9] (whole-excerpt, per-song)
- Replace formulas:
  - v_deam = 1 + (8/6) * (v_fe + 3)
  - a_deam = 1 + (8/6) * a_fe
- Insert `fe_to_deam_static` helper in docs’ code blocks
- Update MATCH/runtime text to reference static scaling
- Mark dynamic path as optional/future work in kNN indexing doc

Affected: docs/Stage 0 — Foundations/glossary.md, docs/Stage 0 — Foundations/conventions.md, docs/Stage I — Data/scaling-and-segmentation.md, docs/Stage I — Data/datasets-deam.md, docs/Stage I — Data/data-validation.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/scaling-in-inference.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/deam-indexing-and-knn.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/runtime-pipeline.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/retrieval-dwell-and-variety.md, docs/Stage II — Modeling/model-interfaces.md, docs/music_mapping.md, docs/project_overview.md
Test Plan:
- Open updated docs; verify FE→DEAM formulas and mapping text
- Search for legacy dynamic mapping still lingering:
  - rg "10/3" docs/
  - rg "-10\\s*\\+\\s*\\(20/6\\)" docs/
- Sanity-check examples for expected numeric ranges [1,9]
Revert plan:
- Restore legacy dynamic mapping formulas and prior text in the
  affected files (git revert or checkout previous revision)

docs/Stage IV — Inference/deam-indexing-and-knn.md, after:

# DEAM Indexing and kNN

Note: For this academic POC we are using DEAM static annotations `[1, 9]` (whole 45s excerpt) and song-level retrieval. This page documents the optional dynamic-annotation path (per-frame `[-10, 10]`) for future work.

- [ ] Segment DEAM into 10s windows with 50% overlap (2 Hz annotations)
- [ ] Build KD-Tree over segment means in V-A space
- [ ] Persist `segments_metadata` and KD-Tree for reuse
- [ ] Validate index quality on sample queries

Extracted from [project_overview.md](file:///Users/desmondchoy/Projects/emo-rec/docs/project_overview.md).

## Segmentation

- Window size: 10 seconds
- Overlap: 50% (step = window × 0.5)
- Labels: mean valence and arousal per window (DEAM dynamic annotations in [-10, 10])

## Indexing

- Build KD-Tree on `[[valence, arousal], ...]` for fast k-NN.
- Store alongside a dataframe with: `song_id`, `start_time`, `end_time`, `valence`, `arousal`.

## Reference implementation

```python
class DEAMSegmentProcessor:
    def __init__(self, deam_path, window_size=10, overlap=0.5):
        self.deam_path = deam_path
        self.window_size = window_size
        self.overlap = overlap
        self.sampling_rate = 2  # Hz

    def process_dataset(self):
        annotations = pd.read_csv(f"{self.deam_path}/annotations_dynamic.csv")
        segments = []
        for song_id, song_data in annotations.groupby('song_id'):
            segments.extend(self._extract_segments(song_id, song_data))
        segments_df = pd.DataFrame(segments)
        self.kd_tree = KDTree(segments_df[['valence', 'arousal']].values)
        self.segments_metadata = segments_df
        return segments_df
```
