docs/Stage 0 — Foundations/glossary.md, before:

# Glossary

- Valence/Arousal scales:
  - FindingEmo valence: `[-3, 3]`
  - FindingEmo arousal: `[0, 6]`
  - DEAM dynamic annotations (per-frame): `[-10, 10]`
  - DEAM static annotations (per 45s excerpt): `[1, 9]`
  - For this academic POC, we use DEAM static annotations `[1, 9]`.
  - FE→DEAM mapping (POC: to static [1, 9]):
    - Valence: `v_deam = 1 + (8/6) * (v_fe + 3)`
    - Arousal: `a_deam = 1 + (8/6) * a_fe`

- PERCEIVE: Per-frame extraction of valence–arousal using scene and face models with MC Dropout for uncertainty.

- STABILIZE: Exponential Moving Average smoothing with uncertainty gating (hold last stable output when variance exceeds a threshold). Defaults cited for MVP: `alpha = 0.7`, `uncertainty_threshold τ ≈ 0.4`, `n_mc_samples ≈ 5`.

- MATCH (POC): Song-level retrieval over DEAM static [1, 9] using simple k-NN (linear
  scan) plus minimum dwell time (20–30s) and recent-song memory. Optional: GMM
  “station” gating using the DEAM clustering notebook to bias selection toward
  the most probable mood cluster. Segment-level + KD-Tree is future/optional.

- MC Dropout: Multiple stochastic forward passes with dropout active to estimate prediction uncertainty (mean and variance across samples).

- EMA (Exponential Moving Average): Temporal smoothing where `ema_t = α * x_t + (1-α) * ema_{t-1}`.

- CCC (Concordance Correlation Coefficient): Primary evaluation metric combining correlation and agreement between predictions and ground truth.

- Scene–Face Divergence: Mean Euclidean distance between scene and face predictions when both available; high divergence may indicate context overfitting in the scene model.

- Dwell time: Minimum duration (≈20–30s) to keep the current music segment before allowing a switch.

- KD-Tree / k-NN: Acceleration structure for large catalogs. Optional here since
  the catalog is small; a linear scan suffices for the POC.

- GMM Stations: Gaussian Mixture clusters (K≈5, diag covariance) trained on
  DEAM song-level valence–arousal (in reference space with StandardScaler).
  Used to gate or bias retrieval toward the active “mood station.”

- Fusion (variance-weighted): Combine predictions by weighting each by inverse variance; normalized to produce fused prediction and approximate fused variance.

- Affine Calibration: Cross-domain bias correction using learnable linear transformation `output = scale * input + shift`. Corrects systematic differences between emotion datasets (e.g., EmoNet face predictions vs FindingEmo scene labels) with 4 parameters: scale_v, scale_a, shift_v, shift_a.

- Domain Shift: Systematic biases between emotion recognition contexts (facial expressions vs scene emotions) due to different annotation protocols, human labelers, and semantic gaps between modalities.

Commit message:

docs(deam): song-level GMM gate + linear k-NN
Switch DEAM retrieval docs from segment-level + KD-Tree to song-level matching. Document GMM “station gate” with predict_proba and soft top-2 when top posterior is low. Rank within gated clusters via linear-scan Euclidean k-NN. Update pipelines, examples, and terminology accordingly.

- Remove Segment-level + KD-Tree from retrieval/inference docs
- State song-level matching over DEAM static [1, 9]
- Add GMM station gating via predict_proba as primary gate
- Soft gate: widen to top-2 if top posterior < 0.55
- Rank within gated clusters by Euclidean distance (linear scan)
- Update runtime/architecture diagrams and MATCH policy
- Rename “segment(s)” to “song(s)” in examples and UI labels
- Preprocessing/validation: per-song metadata; drop KD-Tree
- Experiments: ablation now station-gated vs ungated
- Keep glossary KD-Tree note (not used in POC) for context

Affected: docs/Stage 0 — Foundations/glossary.md, docs/Stage 0 — Foundations/overview.md, docs/Stage I — Data/data-validation.md, docs/Stage I — Data/datasets-deam.md, docs/Stage I — Data/preprocessing-and-caches.md, docs/Stage I — Data/scaling-and-segmentation.md, docs/Stage III — Training/experiments-log.md, docs/Stage III — Training/losses-and-metrics.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/deam-indexing-and-knn.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/retrieval-dwell-and-variety.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/runtime-pipeline.md, docs/music_mapping.md, docs/project_overview.md

Test Plan:
- rg -n "Segment-level|KD-Tree|KDTree|kdtree" docs shows no retrieval
  use; glossary notes KD-Tree not used in POC.
- rg -n "GMM station|predict_proba|top-2" docs shows new gating policy
  in MATCH docs and examples.
- Skim updated mermaid/text blocks for consistency.

Revert plan:
- git restore -- <each file> to previous content, or revert this commit
  to reinstate segment-level/KD-Tree descriptions.

docs/Stage 0 — Foundations/glossary.md, after:

# Glossary

- Valence/Arousal scales:
  - FindingEmo valence: `[-3, 3]`
  - FindingEmo arousal: `[0, 6]`
  - DEAM dynamic annotations (per-frame): `[-10, 10]`
  - DEAM static annotations (per 45s excerpt): `[1, 9]`
  - For this academic POC, we use DEAM static annotations `[1, 9]`.
  - FE→DEAM mapping (POC: to static [1, 9]):
    - Valence: `v_deam = 1 + (8/6) * (v_fe + 3)`
    - Arousal: `a_deam = 1 + (8/6) * a_fe`

- PERCEIVE: Per-frame extraction of valence–arousal using scene and face models with MC Dropout for uncertainty.

- STABILIZE: Exponential Moving Average smoothing with uncertainty gating (hold last stable output when variance exceeds a threshold). Defaults cited for MVP: `alpha = 0.7`, `uncertainty_threshold τ ≈ 0.4`, `n_mc_samples ≈ 5`.

- MATCH (POC): Song-level retrieval over DEAM static [1, 9] using simple k-NN (linear scan) plus minimum dwell time (20–30s) and recent-song memory.  
GMM “station” gating assigns the stabilized V/A to the most likely cluster via `predict_proba`. If the top posterior is low (e.g., < 0.55), widen the gate to the top-2 clusters. Rank within the selected cluster set by Euclidean distance between the stabilized V/A and each song’s V/A; pick top-1 (or top-N for variety).

- MC Dropout: Multiple stochastic forward passes with dropout active to estimate prediction uncertainty (mean and variance across samples).

- EMA (Exponential Moving Average): Temporal smoothing where `ema_t = α * x_t + (1-α) * ema_{t-1}`.

- CCC (Concordance Correlation Coefficient): Primary evaluation metric combining correlation and agreement between predictions and ground truth.

- Scene–Face Divergence: Mean Euclidean distance between scene and face predictions when both available; high divergence may indicate context overfitting in the scene model.

- Dwell time: Minimum duration (≈20–30s) to keep the current song before allowing a switch.

- GMM Stations: Gaussian Mixture clusters (K≈5, diag covariance) trained on
  DEAM song-level valence–arousal (in reference space with StandardScaler).
  Used to gate or bias retrieval toward the active “mood station.”

- Fusion (variance-weighted): Combine predictions by weighting each by inverse variance; normalized to produce fused prediction and approximate fused variance.

- Affine Calibration: Cross-domain bias correction using learnable linear transformation `output = scale * input + shift`. Corrects systematic differences between emotion datasets (e.g., EmoNet face predictions vs FindingEmo scene labels) with 4 parameters: scale_v, scale_a, shift_v, shift_a.

- Domain Shift: Systematic biases between emotion recognition contexts (facial expressions vs scene emotions) due to different annotation protocols, human labelers, and semantic gaps between modalities.
