docs/Stage I — Data/scaling-and-segmentation.md, before:

# Scaling and Matching (POC default)

- [✅] Implemented unified EmotionScaleAligner for all scale conversions
- [✅] Song-level matching over DEAM static `[1, 9]` (no segmentation)
- [ ] Verify mapping with plots

## Unified Scale Alignment

All scale conversions are now handled by the EmotionScaleAligner class:

```python
from utils.emotion_scale_aligner import EmotionScaleAligner

# Initialize aligner
aligner = EmotionScaleAligner()

# FindingEmo → DEAM static conversion
v_deam, a_deam = aligner.findingemo_to_deam_static(v_fe, a_fe)
```

- Note: For this academic POC we use DEAM static annotations `[1, 9]` (dynamic `[-10, 10]` also available).
- FE ranges: Valence `[-3, 3]`, Arousal `[0, 6]` → DEAM static ranges `[1, 9]`.
- All conversions maintain consistency and handle edge cases automatically.

## DEAM Segmentation (optional/future)
- Window size: `10s`
- Overlap: `50%`
- Sampling rate used: `2 Hz`
- Optional indexing: KD-Tree over segment means.
- Persist segment metadata: `song_id`, `start_time`, `end_time`, `valence`, `arousal`.

## Cluster-Gated Song Selection (from notebook)
- Train a `StandardScaler` and `GaussianMixture(K≈5, covariance_type='diag')` on
  DEAM song-level valence–arousal mapped to reference `[-1, 1]`.
- At runtime, transform stabilized `(v_ref, a_ref)` with the scaler and use
  `predict_proba` to obtain soft cluster posteriors.
- Choose top-1 cluster (or mix top-2 by posterior) and select within-cluster
  songs via simple distance to the query point (naive k-NN), with dwell-time
  and recent-song memory to avoid thrash.

Commit message:

docs(deam): song-level GMM gate + linear k-NN
Switch DEAM retrieval docs from segment-level + KD-Tree to song-level matching. Document GMM “station gate” with predict_proba and soft top-2 when top posterior is low. Rank within gated clusters via linear-scan Euclidean k-NN. Update pipelines, examples, and terminology accordingly.

- Remove Segment-level + KD-Tree from retrieval/inference docs
- State song-level matching over DEAM static [1, 9]
- Add GMM station gating via predict_proba as primary gate
- Soft gate: widen to top-2 if top posterior < 0.55
- Rank within gated clusters by Euclidean distance (linear scan)
- Update runtime/architecture diagrams and MATCH policy
- Rename “segment(s)” to “song(s)” in examples and UI labels
- Preprocessing/validation: per-song metadata; drop KD-Tree
- Experiments: ablation now station-gated vs ungated
- Keep glossary KD-Tree note (not used in POC) for context

Affected: docs/Stage 0 — Foundations/glossary.md, docs/Stage 0 — Foundations/overview.md, docs/Stage I — Data/data-validation.md, docs/Stage I — Data/datasets-deam.md, docs/Stage I — Data/preprocessing-and-caches.md, docs/Stage I — Data/scaling-and-segmentation.md, docs/Stage III — Training/experiments-log.md, docs/Stage III — Training/losses-and-metrics.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/deam-indexing-and-knn.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/retrieval-dwell-and-variety.md, docs/Stage IV — Inference/runtime-pipeline.md, docs/music_mapping.md, docs/project_overview.md

Test Plan:
- rg -n "Segment-level|KD-Tree|KDTree|kdtree" docs shows no retrieval
  use; glossary notes KD-Tree not used in POC.
- rg -n "GMM station|predict_proba|top-2" docs shows new gating policy
  in MATCH docs and examples.
- Skim updated mermaid/text blocks for consistency.

Revert plan:
- git restore -- <each file> to previous content, or revert this commit
  to reinstate segment-level/KD-Tree descriptions.

docs/Stage I — Data/scaling-and-segmentation.md, after:

# Scaling and Matching (POC default)

- [✅] Implemented unified EmotionScaleAligner for all scale conversions
- [✅] Song-level matching over DEAM static `[1, 9]` (no segmentation)
- [ ] Verify mapping with plots

## Unified Scale Alignment

All scale conversions are now handled by the EmotionScaleAligner class:

```python
from utils.emotion_scale_aligner import EmotionScaleAligner

# Initialize aligner
aligner = EmotionScaleAligner()

# FindingEmo → DEAM static conversion
v_deam, a_deam = aligner.findingemo_to_deam_static(v_fe, a_fe)
```

- Note: For this academic POC we use DEAM static annotations `[1, 9]` (dynamic `[-10, 10]` also available).
- FE ranges: Valence `[-3, 3]`, Arousal `[0, 6]` → DEAM static ranges `[1, 9]`.
- All conversions maintain consistency and handle edge cases automatically.

## GMM Station Gating (Song-Level)
- Train a `StandardScaler` and `GaussianMixture(K≈5, covariance_type='diag')` on
  DEAM song-level valence–arousal in reference space `[-1, 1]`.
- At runtime, transform stabilized `(v_ref, a_ref)` with the scaler and use
  `predict_proba` for soft posteriors.
- If the top posterior is < 0.55, widen the gate to include the top-2 clusters.
- Within the selected cluster set, rank songs by Euclidean distance between the
  stabilized V/A and each song’s song-level V/A; select top-1 (or top-N).

## Cluster-Gated Song Selection (from notebook)
- Train a `StandardScaler` and `GaussianMixture(K≈5, covariance_type='diag')` on
  DEAM song-level valence–arousal mapped to reference `[-1, 1]`.
- At runtime, transform stabilized `(v_ref, a_ref)` with the scaler and use
  `predict_proba` to obtain soft cluster posteriors.
- Choose top-1 cluster (or mix top-2 by posterior) and select within-cluster
  songs via simple distance to the query point (naive k-NN), with dwell-time
  and recent-song memory to avoid thrash.
